The object isn’t to make art, it’s to be in that wonderful state which makes art inevitable.
Creativity doesn’t exclusively relate to making art. We all engage in this act on a daily basis. To create is to bring something into existence that wasn’t there before.
Artists who are able to continually create great works throughout their lives often manage to preserve childlike qualities. Practicing a way of being that allows you to see the world through uncorrupted, innocent eyes can free you to act in concert with the universe’s timetable.
If something strikes me as interesting or beautiful, first I live that experience. Only afterward I might attempt to understand it.
The ability to look deeply is the root of creativity. To see past the ordinary and mundane and get to what might otherwise be invisible.
Each of us has a container within. It is constantly being filled with data. It holds the sum total of our thoughts, feelings, dreams, and experiences in the world. Let’s call this the vessel. Information does not enter the vessel directly like rain filling into a barrel.
To navigate our way through this immense world of data, we learn early in life to focus on information that appears essential or of particular interest and to tune out the rest.
As artists, we seek to restore our childlike perception: a more innocent state of wonder and appreciation not tethered to utility or survival.
We aren’t creating to produce or sell material products. The act of creation is an attempt to enter a mysterious realm. A longing to transcend. What we create allows us to share glimpses of an inner landscape, one that is beyond our understanding. Art is our portal to the unseen world.
The spiritual world provides a sense of wonder and a degree of open-mindedness not always found within the confines of science
Notice connections and consider where they lead
Look for what you notice, but no one else sees.
Widening one’s scope allows for more moments of interest to be noticed and collected, building a treasury of material to draw from later.
Awareness needs constant refreshing. If it becomes a habit, even a good habit, it will need to be reinvented again and again.
Until one day, you notice that you are always in the practice of awareness, at all times, in all places, living your life in a state of constant openness to receiving.
Consider submerging yourself in the canon of great works. Read the finest literature, watch the masterpieces of cinema, get up close to the most influential paintings, and visit architectural landmarks.
Of all the great works that we can experience, nature is the most absolute and enduring. We can witness it change through the seasons. We can see it in the mountains, the oceans, the deserts, and the forest. We can watch the changes of the moon each night and the relationship between the moon and the stars.
There is never a shortage of awe and inspiration to be found outdoors.
Nature transcends our tendencies to label and classify, to reduce and limit. The natural world is unfathomably more rich, interwoven, and complicated than we are taught, and so much more mysterious and beautiful.
The person who makes something today isn’t the same person who returns to the work tomorrow.
Our inner world is every bit as interesting, beautiful, and surprising as nature itself. It is, after all, born of nature. When we go inside, we are processing what’s going on outside. We’re no longer separate. We’re connected. We are one.
Keeping a dream journal might be of use. Place a pen and paper next to the bed, and as soon as you wake up, begin
writing immediately with as much detail as possible before doing anything else. Try to limit any unnecessary movement.
I'm strongly affected by the sun. When it’s a bright day, I feel energized. When it’s gloomy, I’m gloomy. On those overcast days, it helps to tune in to the fact that the sun is still there. It’s just hidden behind a thicker layer of clouds. At noon, the sun is high in the sky, regardless of how light or dark it is outside.
In the same way, regardless of how much we’re paying attention, the information we seek is out there. If we’re aware, we get to tune in to more of it. If we’re less aware, we miss it. When we miss it, it really does pass us by.
Tomorrow presents another opportunity for awareness, but it’s never an opportunity for the same awareness. Oceans are fine locations to receive direct transmissions from the universe. If instead, you want to tune in to the collective consciousness, you might sit in a busy spot with people coming and going and experience Source as filtered through humanity. This secondhand approach is no less valid.
It’s better to follow the universe than those around you.
Flaws are human, and the attraction of art is the humanity held in it. If we were machinelike, the art wouldn’t resonate. It would be soulless. With life comes pain, insecurity, and fear.
If a creator is so afraid of judgment that they’re unable to move forward, it might be that the desire to share the work isn’t as strong as the desire to protect themselves. Perhaps art isn’t their role. Their temperament might serve a different pursuit. This path is not for everyone. Adversity is part of the process.
If you see tremendous beauty or tremendous pain where other people see little or nothing at all, you’re confronted with big feelings all the time. These emotions can be confusing and overwhelming. When those around you don’t see what you see and feel what you feel, this can lead to a sense of isolation and a general feeling of not belonging, of otherness.
How do we move forward, considering the stories we tell ourselves? One of the best strategies is to lower the stakes. We tend to think that what we’re making is the most important thing in our lives and that it’s going to define us for all eternity. Consider moving forward with the more accurate point of view that it’s a small work, a beginning. The mission is to complete the project so you can move on to the next. That next one is a stepping-stone to the following work. And so it continues in a productive rhythm for the entirety of your creative life.
Realizing you are fortunate to be in a position that allows you to create and in some cases, get paid to do what you love might tip the balance in favor of the work.
Doubting yourself can lead to a sense of hopelessness, of not being inherently fit to take on the task at hand. All-or-nothing thinking is a non-starter. However, doubting the quality of your work might, at times, help to improve it.
The Leaning Tower of Pisa was an architectural error, which builders further exacerbated by trying to fix. Now, hundreds of years later, it’s one of the most visited buildings in the world precisely because of this mistake. In Japanese pottery, there’s an artful form of repair called kintsugi. When a piece of ceramic pottery breaks, rather than trying to restore it to its original condition, the artisan accentuates the fault by using gold to fill the crack. This beautifully draws attention to where the work was broken, creating a golden vein. Instead of the flaw diminishing the work, it becomes a focal point, an area of both physical and aesthetic strength. The scar also tells the story of the piece, chronicling its past experience.
Distraction is one of the best tools available to the artist when used skillfully. In some cases, it’s the only way to get where we are going. When meditating, as soon as the mind quiets, the sense of space can be overtaken by a worry or a random thought. This is why many meditation schools teach students to use a mantra. An automatic, repeated phrase leaves little room in the mind for thoughts that pull us out of the moment. The mantra, then, is a distraction. And while certain distractions can take you out of the present moment, others can keep the conscious part of yourself busy so that the unconscious is freed up to work for you.
Nothing begins with us. The more we pay attention, the more we begin to realize that all the work we ever do is a collaboration. It’s a collaboration with the art that’s come before you and the art that will come after. It’s also a collaboration with the world you’re living in. With the experiences you’ve had. With the tools you use. With the audience. And with who you are today.
The purpose of the work is to awaken something in you first and then allow something to be awakened in others. And it’s fine if they’re not the same thing. We can only hope that the magnitude of the charge we experience reverberates as powerfully for others as it does for us.
Our thoughts, feelings, processes, and unconscious beliefs have an energy that is hidden in the work. This unseen, unmeasurable force gives each piece its magnetism.
The rules artists learn are different. They are assumptions, not absolutes. They describe a goal or method for short-term or long-term results. They are there to be tested. And they are only of value as long as they are helpful. They are not laws of nature.
Rules direct us to average behaviors. If we’re aiming to create works that are exceptional, most rules don’t apply. Average is nothing to aspire to.
The artists who define each generation are generally the ones who live outside of these boundaries. Not the artists who embody the beliefs and conventions of their time, but the ones who transcend them.
It’s a healthy practice to approach our work with as few accepted rules, starting points, and limitations as possible.
As soon as you use a label to describe what you’re working on, there’s a temptation to conform to its rules.
Every innovation risks becoming a rule. And innovation risks becoming an end in itself. When we make a discovery that serves our work, it’s not unusual to concretize this into a formula. On occasion, we decide this formula is who we are as an artist. What our voice is and isn’t.
It’s helpful to continually challenge your own process. If you had a good result using a specific style, method, or working condition, don’t assume that is the best way. Or your way. Or the only way.
Start the next project by scrapping that palette. The uncertainty that results can be a thrilling and scary proposition.
Beware of the assumption that the way you work is the best way simply because it’s the way you’ve done it before.
For every rule followed, examine the possibility that the opposite might be similarly interesting. Not necessarily better, just different. In the same way, you can try the opposite or the extreme of what’s suggested in these pages, and it will likely be just as fruitful.
While the eyes and the mouth can be sealed, an ear has no lid, nothing to close. It takes in what surrounds it. It receives but can’t transmit.
When listening, we tend to skip forward and generalize the speaker’s overall message. We miss the subtleties of the point, if not the entire premise.
I might read a paragraph that inspires a thought and while my eyes continue moving across the page in the physical act of reading, my mind may still be lost in the previous idea. I’m not taking in information anymore.
When I realize this, I return to the last paragraph I can recall and start reading from there again. Sometimes it’s three or four pages back.
Patience is developed much like awareness. Through an acceptance of what is. Impatience is an argument with reality. The desire for something to be different from what we are experiencing in the here and now. A wish for time to speed up, tomorrow to come sooner, to relive yesterday, or to close your eyes then open them and find yourself in another place.
Any label you assume before sitting down to create, even one as foundational as sculptor, rapper, author, or entrepreneur, could be doing more harm than good. Strip away the labels. Now how do you see the world? 
Talent is the ability to let ideas manifest themselves through you.
For the lungs to draw in air, they must first be emptied. For the mind to draw inspiration, it wants space to welcome the new. The universe seeks balance. Through this absence, you are inviting energy in.
To vary your inspiration, consider varying your inputs.
Ride the wave as long as it can be ridden. If you are fortunate enough to experience the strike of inspiration, take full advantage of the access. Remain in the energy of this rarefied moment for as long as it lasts. When flowing, keep going.
The only person you’re ever competing against is yourself. The rest is out of your control.
Discipline and freedom seem like opposites. In reality, they are partners. Discipline is not a lack of freedom, it is a harmonious relationship with time. Managing your schedule and daily habits well is a necessary component to free up the practical and creative capacity to make great art.
Find the sustainable rituals that best support your work. If you set a routine that is oppressive, you’ll likely find excuses not to show up. It’s in the interest of your art to create an easily achievable schedule to start with.
In the first phase of the creative process, we are to be completely open, collecting anything we find of interest.
We can call this the Seed phase. We’re searching for potential starting points that, with love and care, can grow into something beautiful. At this stage, we are not comparing them to find the best seed. We simply gather them.
Collecting seeds typically doesn’t involve a tremendous amount of effort. It’s more a receiving of a transmission. A noticing.
As if catching fish, we walk to the water, bait the hook, cast the line, and patiently wait. We cannot control the fish, only the presence of our line.
It’s generally preferable to accumulate several weeks’ or months’ worth of ideas and then choose which of them to focus on, instead of following an urge or obligation to rush to the finish line with what is in front of us today.
We have collected a handful of seeds—of starting points and potentialities. We now enter the second stage, the Experimentation phase.
Fueled by the initial hit of excitement at discovering a starting point, we play with different combinations and possibilities to see if any of them reveal how the seed wants to develop.
In this phase, we are not looking at which iteration progresses the quickest or furthest, but which holds the most promise. We focus on the flourishing and wait to prune. We generate possibilities instead of eliminating them. Editing prematurely can close off routes that might lead to beautiful vistas previously unseen.
Consider how many innovations that might have changed the world have been lost because someone was so focused on their goal, they missed the revelation right in front of them.
If you know what you want to do and you do it, that’s the work of a craftsman. If you begin with a question and use it to guide an adventure of discovery, that’s the work of the artist.
If two ideas feel somewhat equal in weight, and one has clear potential to turn into something beautiful and the other shows less potential but seems more interesting, feel free to follow your interest. Base decisions on the internal feeling of being moved and notice what holds your interest.
To dismiss an idea because it doesn’t work in your mind is to do a disservice to the art. The only way to truly know if any idea works is to test it. And if you’re looking for the best idea, test everything.
Ask yourself as many “what if” questions as you can. What if I made all the loud parts quiet? Look for different polarities and see how they affect the piece.
We want to set up an environment where the decision-making occurs free of the misguiding force of persuasion. Persuasion leads to mediocrity. To be evaluated, ideas have to be seen, heard, tasted or touched.
Once a seed’s code has been cracked and its true form deciphered, the process shifts. We are no longer in the unbounded mode of discovery. A clear sense of direction has arisen. Often unbeknownst to us, we find ourselves in the Craft phase.
Once enough data is collected, and the vision is clear, it can be helpful to set deadlines for completion.
In the Craft phase, deadlines are suggested completion dates rather than set in stone.
By remaining too long in this phase, many pitfalls may arise. One is disconnection. If an artist is creating a beautiful work, and keeps endlessly crafting it beyond the need, sometimes they suddenly want to start all over. This can be because they have changed or the times have changed.
To avoid demo-itis (getting too attached to a demo or project and then refusing to make significant changes), there is a simple technique. Unless actively working to make something better, avoid listening to it, reading it, playing it, looking at it, or showing it to friends. Work as far forward as you can while crafting and then step away, without repetitively consuming the unfinished work. By not accepting the work-in-progress as the standard version, we leave room for growth, change, and development to continue.
When you’re on a roll in the Craft phase, work toward a full first draft. Maintain the momentum. If you reach a section of the work that gives you trouble, instead of letting this blockage stop you, work around it. Although your instinct may be to create sequentially, bypass the section where you’re stuck, complete the other parts, then come back to it.
Artists allow us to see what we are unable to see, but somehow already know.
The personal is what makes art matter. Our point of view, not our drawing skills or musical virtuosity, or ability to tell a story.
A point of view is different from having a point. A point is an idea intentionally expressed. A point of view is the perspective—conscious and unconscious—through which the work emerges.
It’s of no use to know your point of view. It’s already there, working in the background, ever evolving. Efforts to portray point of view on purpose often lead to a false representation. We hold on to stories about our perspective that are inaccurate and limiting.
When someone turns left, it shows we can also go right.
In the Completion phase, we leave behind discovery and building
We write an essay and give it to a friend, before even hearing their perspective, our relationship to the work changes. Give it to a mentor and our perspective shifts in a different way. We interrogate ourselves when we  offer our work up to others. We ask the questions we didn’t ask ourselves when we were making it. Sharing it in this limited capacity brings our underlying doubts to light.
Although we avoid deadlines early in the process, in the Completion phase, a due date could help bring time into focus and support you in completing the work.
Choosing to live in scarcity leads to stagnation. If we work on one project forever, we never get to make another. The fear of drought and the impulse for perfectionism prevent us from moving on and block the river’s flow.
It’s dispiriting to complete and share a work you’ve lost connection with.
The recognition of abundance fills us with hope that our brightest ideas still await us and our greatest work is yet to come.
Much of the artistic process involves ignoring rules, letting go of rules, undermining rules, and rooting out rules that we didn’t know we were following. There is also a place for imposing rules. For using rules as a tool to define a given project.
There are no bad rules or good rules. Only rules that fit the situation and serve the art, or those that don’t. If the goal is to create the most beautiful work possible, then whatever directives are truly in service to that end are the right ones to use.
Set parameters that force you out of your comfort zone.
Breaking the rules, you’ll come to have a greater understanding of your past choices.
If you think, “I don’t like it but someone else will,” you are not making art for yourself. You’ve found yourself in the business of commerce, which is fine; it just may not be art.
Success occurs in the privacy of the soul. It comes in the moment you decide to release the work, before exposure to a single opinion.
Popular success is a poor barometer of work and worth.
If practicing detachment, the response might be: I wasn’t expecting that plot twist. I wonder what’s going to happen to our hero next.
The ecstatic is our compass, pointing to our true north. It arises genuinely in the process of creation. You’re working and struggling, and suddenly you notice a shift. A revelation. A small tweak is made, a new angle is revealed, and it takes your breath away. The ecstatic can be experienced in different ways. At times, it’s a sense of relaxed excitement, like when you’re asked a question that you don’t think you know the answer to yet you find yourself responding perfectly from a deeper sense of knowing. A rising of energy in the body may create a calm, invigorating confidence. Other times, it is a moment of astonishment, when you feel emotions so powerful that you can’t believe they’re happening. They jolt your reality and push you into a sense of disbelief. Like realizing you’re driving into oncoming traffic. Then there’s a third kind, where you’re gently transported out of reality, without knowing it. While listening to a song, you may find yourself closing your eyes and being taken somewhere.
Sometimes the ideas that least match our expectations are the most innovative. By definition, revolutionary ideas have no context.
Be aware of strong responses. If you’re immediately turned off by an experience, it’s worth examining why. Powerful reactions often indicate deeper wells of meaning.
Wanting to outperform another artist or make a work better than theirs rarely results in true greatness.
Being made happy by someone else’s best work, and then letting it inspire you to rise to the occasion is not competition. It’s collaboration.
All the work we do, no matter how intricate, holds an underlying essence. Some might call it an “is-ness.” Sometimes you may not yet know the essence when you’re engaged in the work. You’re merely experimenting and playing. When you end up with something you like, you may come to realize what the essence is.
Distilling a work to get it as close to its essence as possible is a useful and informative practice. Notice how many pieces you can remove before the work you’re making ceases to be the work you’re making.
Refine it to the point where it is stripped bare, in its least decorative form yet still intact. With nothing extra. Sometimes the ornamentation can be of use, often not. Less is generally more.
Perfection is finally obtained not when there is no longer anything to add, but when there’s no longer anything to take away — Antoine de Saint-Exupéry
Art reality is forever unknown.
The creator stops being the creator once they finish the work. They then become the viewer. And the viewer can bring as much of their own meaning to a piece as the creator.
At any stage in a career, the critic in your head may make its voice heard. Repeating that you’re not talented enough. Your idea isn’t good enough. Art isn’t a worthwhile investment of your time. The result won’t be well-received. You’re a failure.
Self-awareness allows us to listen to what’s going on in the body, and notice the energetic changes that either pull us forward or push us away. Sometimes they are subtle, other times, intense.
Be mindful not to abandon a project prematurely because you have given in to all-or-nothing thinking.
When you look at the work, practice truly seeing what’s there, without a negativity bias. Be open to seeing both strength and weakness, instead of focusing on the weakness and allowing it to overwhelm the strength. You might come to realize 80 percent of the work is quite good, and if the other 20 percent fits in just the right way, the work becomes magnificent
We may discard ideas that don’t seem of great importance or magnitude. But the size does not matter. Volume does not equal value. We can’t weigh Source material based on the initial impact it makes on arrival. Sometimes the smallest seed grows into the biggest tree.
When we sit down to work, remember that the outcome is out of our control. If we are willing to take each step into the unknown with grit and determination, carrying with us all of our collected knowledge, we will ultimately get to where we’re going. This destination may not be one we’ve chosen in advance. It will likely be more interesting.
You work not as an evangelist, expecting miracles, but as a scientist, testing and adjusting and testing again.
If we try ten experiments and none of them work, we have a choice. We can take it personally, and think of ourselves as a failure and question our ability to solve the problem. Or we can recognize we’ve ruled out ten ways that don’t work, bringing us that much closer to a solution.
Purposely experiment past the boundaries of your taste. Consider expanding this practice to relationships as well. When a collaborator’s feedback or method seems questionable and conflicts with your default setting, reframe this as an exciting opportunity.
Creativity is something you are, not only something you do.
Art made accidentally has no more or less weight than art created through sweat and struggle. Whether it took months or minutes does not matter. Quality isn’t based on the amount of time invested.
It is worth recording using both methods and then devising a way to listen to each without any indication of which is which.
If you’re at an impasse in an A/B test, consider the coin toss method. Decide which option will be heads and which will be tails, then flip the coin. When the coin is spinning in the air, you’ll likely notice a quiet preference or wish for one of the two to come up. Which are you rooting for? This is the option to go with. It’s the one the heart desires.
When the work has five mistakes, it’s not yet completed. When it has eight mistakes, it might be.
Wanting to change people’s minds about an issue or have an effect on society may interfere with the quality and purity of the work.
Your path is unique, for only you to follow. There is no single route to great art. This doesn’t mean ignore the wisdom of others. Receive wisdom skillfully.
If you feel unable to hit a note or faithfully paint an image, it’s helpful to remember that the challenge is not that you can’t do it, but that you haven’t done it yet. Avoid thinking in impossibilities.
If we train ourselves to step away from the work, to truly detach from it, to distract ourselves completely, to dive fully into something else. After being away for a long enough period of time, when we come back, we just may be able to see it as if for the first time. This is the practice of cleaning the slate.
One musician, I’m told, would add his newest track to a playlist along with the most beloved songs of all time to see if his work stood up in this context. If not, he would set it aside and keep working toward greatness.
A new context may create a work more powerful than the one you anticipated.
If the work is thrilling one day and isn’t for a long while after, you may have experienced a false indicator. When the moments of joy seem like a distant memory and the work feels like an obligation to a past idea, this could mean you’ve either gone too far or that particular seed wasn’t actually ready to germinate yet.
Take art seriously without going about it in a serious way.
Avoid getting stuck with a decision you made five minutes ago.
We create in service to art, not for what we can get from art.
The suggestion to be yourself may be too general to be of much use. There’s being yourself as an artist, being yourself with your family, being yourself at work, being yourself with friends, being yourself in times of crisis or in times of peace, and being yourself for yourself when by yourself.
Believing an idea is best because it’s ours is an error of inexperience.
The most truthful and irrational aspects of ourselves are often hidden, and our access to them lies through the creation of art.
As we move closer to the completion of a project, it can be helpful to drastically cut the work back to only what’s necessary, to conduct a ruthless edit.
If you’re working on a ten-song album and you’ve recorded twenty songs, you’re not aiming to reduce it to ten. You’re shrinking it to five, to only the tracks you can’t live without.
The act of self-expression isn’t really about you.